What is javascript ?

Client side language(primarly)
Simple threaded language 
Object oriented language
Traditional supports functional programming - there no use of class to object oriented programming 
it convert into functional programming then it executes.
Event driven-in brower everything run in event driven
event means there is some action is performed-agar aapne html css then button etc field are there , facebook track every motions that is run bcz of javascript. before javascript there was no user interactions . it was a statics 


why javascript required ?

User Interactivity 
interpreted language - bcz we cannot ask for every user compiled and run - browser directly run without any compilations 
required dynamically typed language - static type like int float etc in c/c++. but in every time we cannot do for browser.

why learn javascript ?
javascript only work in the browser 
it really easy 
elsential language


datatypes and variables
Operators
Comments
Operators
if/else
Loops

why we use Loops
repetion ko reduce karta hai 


//arrays functionality
it is collection of similar datatypes

Study promises, async await, and callbacks:
Write a function to check if it is palindrome:



1.callback-hell:
callback we avoid in asynchronous
2.Inversion of control:



 
SYNCHRONOUS CODE AND asynchronous CODE IN javascript

Synchronous code executes sequentially. Each operation waits for the previous one to complete before executing

Asynchronous code allows multiple operations to run concurrently, without waiting for the previous ones to complete


promises
resolve callback-hell.js



issues with promises
1.Pinpointing the location of an error 
2.fined gained control


issues resolved of promises:
Async Await: isses resolved all of the above 



what is async await?

async and await are reserved word

async-more and less behaves as apromises

node.js is runtime environments:
 for server side programming we use node.js 
 just like c++ as cpp etc.

express.js
it is basic server 


stack-
console log will go
set function timeout will go to stack

web api-time in ms the some data provide 
queue-web api data will remain in queue until stack is not in empty form 


this command we have to use for express-app2
 npx express-generator --no-view --git





what is websockets?
osi models

 tcp-transport layer pe work karta hai 
 software -application pe work karta hai 

a web protocols that uses a tcp connection
works on layer 7 of the osi models
uses http upgrade header 


history of web sockets


http polling
ajax/http request at every fixed intervals 

http long polling 
similar but difference that instead of server responding as soon as it can


comet - low latency 
http streaming 

server sent events (SSE)
allows to push server updates to the client by event source interface 


http            ||          web sockets             important points 

half                        full                         ==>duplex

request                     bidirectional                ==>messaging
response                   


websockets usages and testing 
it is used for real time two way communication like:
web chatting 
games
social medai platform


future of websockets:

webRTC 
Open source communication technology ,a collection of standards,protocols , and javascript api
widely used for many applications.


http/2
http/3


newer protocol with better performance
gaps lef over by http 1.x are filled 




